[red-knot] Add `Type::TypeVar` variant (#17102)
astral-sh/ruff: crates/red_knot_python_semantic/resources/mdtest/generics/pep695.md

        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: T
```

## Subtyping and assignability

An unbounded, unconstrained typevar is assignable to itself, but is not a subtype of itself (or any
other type), since it might be specialized to `Any`, which does not participate in the subtyping
relationship.

It is neither assignable to or a subtype of any other type (including other typevars), since we can
make no assumption about what type it will be specialized to.

```py
from knot_extensions import is_assignable_to, is_subtype_of, static_assert

def unbounded_unconstrained[T, U](t: T, u: U) -> None:
    static_assert(is_assignable_to(T, T))
    static_assert(is_assignable_to(U, U))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(T, U))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(U, T))

    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(T, T))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(U, U))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(T, U))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(U, T))
```

A bounded typevar is assignable to its bound, but the bound is not assignable to the typevar (since
the typevar might be specialized to a smaller type). (TODO: Unless the bound is final, in which case

> the final class is also assignable to the typevar.)

Author: That's a great catch, thank you!

```py
from typing_extensions import final

def bounded[T: int](t: T) -> None:
    static_assert(is_assignable_to(T, int))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(int, T))

    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(T, int))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(int, T))

@final
class FinalClass: ...

def bounded_final[T: FinalClass](t: T) -> None:
    static_assert(is_assignable_to(T, FinalClass))

>     # TODO: is_assignable_to
>     static_assert(not is_assignable_to(FinalClass, T))

Reviewer: See above: I'm not sure if this should really be assignable. `FinalClass` can have no subclasses, but it does have subtypes. So `T` could be `Never`, and  `FinalClass` is not assignable to `T`.

Unrelated hint: I usually encode the assertion that I *want* to hold true and silence the static-assertion error using `# error`. This way, the TODO can be resolved by removing the error assertion instead of having to invert the Boolean condition. It's really just a stylistic preference, but I think it makes the tests a bit easier to read if you can just ignore the comments and see the actual assertions in code:
```suggestion
    # TODO: This should hold true
    # error: [static-assert-error]
    static_assert(is_assignable_to(FinalClass, T))
```

Reviewer: Maybe it could be argued for this particular function that if `T` is `Never`, the function could never be called (as there is no value which could be passed in as argument). And in this sense, `FinalClass` could be considered assignable to `T`, since the body would not be executed if `T` would be `Never`.

But then I could change the example slightly to
```py
def bounded_final[T: FinalClass](t: list[T]) -> T:
    # same body
```
and this function *can* be called with an empty list of type `list[Never]`. And therefore I would conclude that `FinalClass` should not be assignable to `T`.

Author: > Unrelated hint: I usually encode the assertion that I _want_ to hold true and silence the static-assertion error using `# error`.

I like that, thank you!

Author: > But then I could change the example slightly to

I updated all of the functions to use `list[?]` for consistency

> Unrelated hint: I usually encode the assertion that I _want_ to hold true and silence the static-assertion error using `# error`.

With the changes to how we're handling final bounds/constraints, it turns out there aren't any more TODOs.  But I will keep this in mind for the future!

    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(U, T))

def two_final_bounded[T: FinalClass, U: FinalClass](t: T, u: U) -> None:
    # TODO: is_assignable_to
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(T, U))
    # TODO: is_assignable_to
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(U, T))

    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(T, U))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(U, T))
```

A constrained typevar is assignable to the union of its constraints, but not to any of the
constraints individually. None of the constraints are assignable to the typevar.

```py
def constrained[T: (int, str)](t: T) -> None:
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(T, int))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(T, str))
    static_assert(is_assignable_to(T, int | str))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(int, T))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(str, T))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(int | str, T))

    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(T, int))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(T, str))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(T, int | str))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(int, T))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(str, T))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(int | str, T))

> ```

Reviewer: Would it make sense to add a test like the following? I could imagine that code like this gets written if a generic function needs special handling for a particular special case?
```py
class P: ...
class Q: ...

def constrained[T: (P, Q)](t: T) -> None:
    if isinstance(t, P):
        p: P = t  # this works already on your branch
    else:
        q: Q = t  # this yields an error, but should be fine(?)
```
Alternatively, we could also use `reveal_type(t) in those branches and assert on the narrowed types of `t`. We currently reveal `T & P` and `T & ~P`, which might be simplified to `P` and `Q`?

Author: Yes, good idea.  I hadn't touched the narrowing code, but should.

Author: Looking at this more, I think this is because of how I've implemented `is_subtype_of` for typevars. Since they can be specialized to `Any`, I'm treating them as not fully static, so they don't participate in subtyping at all. If we loosened that a bit for constrained types, I think the existing intersection builder logic would simplify these as you suggest.

        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: T
```

## Subtyping and assignability

(Note: for simplicity, all of the prose in this section refers to _subtyping_ involving fully static
typevars. Unless otherwise noted, all of the claims also apply to _assignability_ involving gradual
typevars.)

An unbounded, unconstrained, fully static typevar is a subtype of itself. It is not a subtype of any
other type (including other typevars), since we can make no assumption about what type it will be
specialized to.

```py
from knot_extensions import is_assignable_to, is_subtype_of, static_assert

> def unbounded_unconstrained[T, U](t: list[T], u: list[U]) -> None:

Reviewer 2: I suppose if you have a variable typed as `Never` you should be able to pass it as argument to a function parameter typed as `Never`?

Anyway, not important, using lists is totally fine, I was just curious. This rationale is good enough for me :)

true even if both typevars are bounded by the same final class, since you can specialize the
typevars to `Never` in addition to that final class.

```py
def two_bounded[T: int, U: int](t: list[T], u: list[U]) -> None:
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(T, U))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(U, T))

    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(T, U))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(U, T))

def two_final_bounded[T: FinalClass, U: FinalClass](t: list[T], u: list[U]) -> None:
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(T, U))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(U, T))

    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(T, U))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(U, T))
```

A constrained fully static typevar is assignable to the union of its constraints, but not to any of
the constraints individually. None of the constraints are subtypes of the typevar.

```py
def constrained[T: (int, str)](t: list[T]) -> None:
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(T, int))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(T, str))
    static_assert(is_assignable_to(T, int | str))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(int, T))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(str, T))

>     static_assert(not is_assignable_to(int | str, T))

Author: Per another comment, this description of the "correct order" is not accurate anymore. It's more subtle — LHS constrained typevars have to be handled first, then the order described above

def constrained_singletons[T: (Literal[True], Literal[False])](t: list[T]) -> None:
    static_assert(is_singleton(T))

def constrained_single_valued[T: (Literal[True], tuple[()])](t: list[T]) -> None:
    static_assert(is_single_valued(T))
```

## Unions involving typevars

The union of an unbounded unconstrained typevar with any other type cannot be simplified, since
there is no guarantee what type the typevar will be specialized to.

```py
from typing import Any

def unbounded_unconstrained[T](t: T) -> None:
    def _(x: T | int) -> None:
        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: T | int

    def _(x: T | bool) -> None:
        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: T | bool

    def _(x: T | None) -> None:
        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: T | None

    def _(x: T | Any) -> None:
        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: T | Any
```

The union of a bounded typevar with its bound is that bound. (The typevar is guaranteed to be
specialized to a subtype of the bound.) The union of a bounded typevar with a subtype of its bound
cannot be simplified. (The typevar might be specialized to a different subtype of the bound.)

```py
def bounded[T: int](t: T) -> None:
    def _(x: T | int) -> None:

>         reveal_type(x)  # revealed: int

Reviewer 2: Right, of course, not sure what I was thinking.

    static_assert(is_subtype_of(T, FinalClass))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(FinalClass, T))
```

Two distinct fully static typevars are not subtypes of each other, even if they have the same
bounds, since there is (still) no guarantee that they will be specialized to the same type. This is
true even if both typevars are bounded by the same final class, since you can specialize the
typevars to `Never` in addition to that final class.

```py
def two_bounded[T: Super, U: Super](t: list[T], u: list[U]) -> None:
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(T, U))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(U, T))

    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(T, U))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(U, T))

def two_final_bounded[T: FinalClass, U: FinalClass](t: list[T], u: list[U]) -> None:
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(T, U))
    static_assert(not is_assignable_to(U, T))

    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(T, U))
    static_assert(not is_subtype_of(U, T))
```

A constrained fully static typevar is assignable to the union of its constraints, but not to any of
the constraints individually. None of the constraints are subtypes of the typevar, though the

> intersection of all of its contraints is a subtype of the typevar. (Though that intersection is

Author: Done

> likely to be `Never` in practice.)

Reviewer 2: > To confirm my understanding, `Base` and `Unrelated` are not disjoint because someone could declare a new class that is a subclass of both?

Yep, that's right.

    def _(x: Intersection[T, Not[str]]) -> None:
        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: T & ~str

    def _(x: Intersection[T, Not[bool]]) -> None:
        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: T & ~bool

    def _(x: Intersection[T, Not[int], Not[str]]) -> None:
        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: Never

    def _(x: Intersection[T, Not[None]]) -> None:
        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: T

    def _(x: Intersection[T, Not[Any]]) -> None:
        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: T & Any
```

## Narrowing

We can use narrowing expressions to eliminate some of the possibilities of a constrained typevar:

```py
class P: ...
class Q: ...
class R: ...

def f[T: (P, Q)](t: T) -> None:
    if isinstance(t, P):
        reveal_type(t)  # revealed: P
        p: P = t
    else:
        reveal_type(t)  # revealed: Q
        q: Q = t

    if isinstance(t, Q):
        reveal_type(t)  # revealed: Q
        q: Q = t
    else:
        reveal_type(t)  # revealed: P
        p: P = t

def g[T: (P, Q, R)](t: T) -> None:
    if isinstance(t, P):
        reveal_type(t)  # revealed: P
        p: P = t
    elif isinstance(t, Q):
        reveal_type(t)  # revealed: Q & ~P
        q: Q = t
    else:

>         reveal_type(t)  # revealed: R

Author: Nope.  In the first `elif`, we get `(T & Q) & ~P`, which simplifies to `Q & ~P` because `T & Q` triggers the "typevar with exactly one positive constraint check".

In the `else`, we get `T & ~P & ~Q`, which triggers the "typevar with all but one negative constraint", which simplifies to the remaining constraint, `R`.  The negatives are removed as part of that simplification.

>         reveal_type(t)  # revealed: R

Reviewer 2: Right, but (as we briefly discussed in 1:1) the negative constraints should still remain, because `P`, `Q`, and `R` are not disjoint (due to multiple inheritance as discussed above), and their non-empty intersection should still be excluded. See https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/17189
